Waku post (#12)
vacp2p/vacp2p.github.io: _posts/2020-02-10-waku-current-state.md

---
layout: post
name:  "Waku current state"
title:  "Waku current state"
date:   2020-02-10 12:00:00 +0800
author: oskarth
published: false
permalink: /waku-current-state
categories: research
summary: A research log. Waku current state.
image: /assets/img/TODOFIXME.png
discuss: https://forum.vac.dev/t/TODOFIXME
---

TODO: Picture for bottleneck or Waku

# Where we are at with Waku?

> Waku is our fork of Whisper where we address the shortcomings of Whisper in an iterative manner. We've seen in previous post that Whisper doesn't scale, and why. Here's an update on where we are at with Waku since that [last post](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Waku is our fork of Whisper where we address the shortcomings of Whisper in an iterative manner. We've seen a in [previous post](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku) that Whisper doesn't scale, and why. Here's an update on where we are at with Waku since then.
```

## Current state

**Specs:**

We've cut the spec up into three components. These are:

- Waku (main spec), currently in [version 0.2.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/waku.html)
- Waku envelope data field, currently in [version 0.1.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/envelope-data-format.html)
- Waku mailserver, currently in [version 0.2.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/mailserver.html)

TODO: Update Waku spec to 0.3

**Clients:**

There are currently two clients that implement Waku, these are [Nimbus](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus/tree/master/waku) in Nim and [status-go](https://github.com/status-im/status-go) in Go.

> At the time of this writing the Nimbus client implements the spec fully, but lacks mail server and mail client capability. The status-go client implements everything except bridging mode, which is currently a work in progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing this, the Nimbus client implements the spec fully, but lacks mail server and mail client capability. The status-go client implements everything except bridging mode, which is currently a work in progress.
```

Author: ```suggestion
At the time of writing the Nimbus client implements the spec fully, but lacks mail server and mail client capability. The status-go client implements everything except bridging mode, which is currently a work in progress.
```
https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/199381/is-at-the-time-of-writing-correct/199392

> At the time of this writing the Nimbus client implements the spec fully, but lacks mail server and mail client capability. The status-go client implements everything except bridging mode, which is currently a work in progress.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this detail needs to be added, but the nim implementation also lacks rate limiting and confirmations. But these are optional so in theory it still complies to spec.

Author: added

For more details, see [implementation matrix](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/waku.html#appendix-b-implementation-notes).

In terms of end user applications, work is currently in progress to integrate it into the [Status core app](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/pull/9949) and is expected to be released in their upcoming 1.1 release.

TODO: Fact check this with Adam and Kim

**Simulation:**

> We've got a [simulation](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus/tree/master/waku#testing-waku-protocol) in the Nimbus client that verifies - or rather, fails to falsify - the scalability model posted in an [earlier post](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku). More on this below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've got a [simulation](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus/tree/master/waku#testing-waku-protocol) in the Nimbus client that verifies - or rather, fails to falsify - the scalability model described in an [earlier post](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku). More on this below.
```

## How many users does Waku support?

This is our current understanding of how many users a network running the Waku protocol can support. Specifically in the context of the Status chat app, since that's the most immediate consumer of Waku. It should generalize fairly well to most deployments, but YMMW.

> **tldr (for Status app):**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**tl;dr (for Status app):**
```

- beta: 100 DAU
- v1: 1k DAU
- v1.1 (waku only): 10k DAU (up to x10 with deployment hotfixes)
- v1.2 (waku+dns): 100k DAU (can optionally be folded into v1.1)

*Assuming 10 concurrent users = 100 DAU. Estimate uncertainty increases for each order of magnitude until real-world data is observed.*

> As far as we know right now, there is one immediate bottleneck, a very likely bottleneck after that, and a third bottleneck that is still conjecture but not unlikely to appear. These are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As far as we know right now, these are the bottlenecks we have:
```

Author: Hm, there's only one bottleneck at a time though? They don't appear all at once

Author: I suppose you edit this below

> - Bottleneck 1 - Receive bandwidth for end user clients (aka ‘Fixing Whisper with Waku’)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Immediate bottleneck - Receive bandwidth for end user clients (aka ‘Fixing Whisper with Waku’)
```

> - Bottleneck 2 - Nodes and cluster capacity (aka ‘DNS based node discovery’)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Very likely bottleneck - Nodes and cluster capacity (aka ‘DNS based node discovery’)
```

> - Bottleneck 3 - Full node traffic (aka ‘the routing / partition problem’)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Conjecture but not unlikely to appear- Full node traffic (aka ‘the routing / partition problem’)
```

We've already seen the first bottleneck being discussed in the initial post. Dean wrote a post on [DNS based discovery](https://vac.dev/dns-based-discovery) which explains how we will address the likely second bottleneck. More on the third one in future posts.

For more details on these bottlenecks, uncertainty and mitigations, see [Scalability estimate: How many users can Waku and the Status app support?](https://discuss.status.im/t/scalability-estimate-how-many-users-can-waku-and-the-status-app-support/1514).

TODO: Elaborate on bottleneck 3, kad etc

## Simulation

The ultimate test is real-world usage. Until then, we have a simulation. Here's some data on this.

![](assets/img/waku_simulation.jpeg)

Here we outline two network topologies, Star and full mesh, with 6 randomly connected nodes and 2 X, sending 10000 random envelopes over random topics, including invalid envelopes.

> For light node, bloom filter is set to 1% false positive. It shows the number of valid and invalid envelopes received for the different nodes.

Reviewer 2: With the settings in the quicksim the false positive probability is almost 10% (p=0.087). 
Light node and Waku light node subscribe to 100 randomly selected topics (that makes n=100, k=3, m=512 for the bloom filter). 

Next, one of the full nodes sends 1 envelope over 1 of the 100 topics that the two light nodes subscribed on. This is to test that the subscription works, else the 10k envelopes will of course not be received (come to think of it, this should be done for all 100 topics to be a proper check).
Then, that same full node sends 10000 envelopes over random topics.

This explains why you see 10001 for the full nodes, and 1 for the Waku light node (as in fact, with just 10000 envelopes to random topics, the chance is very low that one of the Waku light node topics gets "hit").

Author: Ah should've looked more carefully, thanks for the correction and added detail :)

Author: fixed

| Full node 3     |     1 | 10001 |       0 |
| Full node 4     |     1 | 10001 |       0 |
| Full node 5     |     1 | 10001 |       0 |
| Light node      |     2 |   815 |       0 |
| Waku light node |     2 |     1 |       0 |

**Full mesh:**

| Description     | Peers | Valid | Invalid |
|-----------------|-------|-------|---------|
| Full node 0     |     7 | 10001 |   20676 |
| Full node 1     |     7 | 10001 |    9554 |
| Full node 2     |     5 | 10001 |   23304 |
| Full node 3     |     5 | 10001 |   11983 |
| Full node 4     |     5 | 10001 |   24425 |
| Full node 5     |     5 | 10001 |   23472 |
| Light node      |     2 |   803 |     803 |
| Waku light node |     2 |     1 |       1 |

Things to note:
- Whisper light node with 1% false positive gets 1% of total traffic
- Waku light node gets ~1000x less envelopes than Whisper light node
- Full mesh results in a lot more duplicate messages, expect for Waku light node

Run the simulation yourself [here](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus/tree/master/waku#testing-waku-protocol). The parameters are configurable, and it is integrated with Prometheus and Grafana.

## Difference between Waku and Whisper

> Summary of main differences between Waku v0 spec and Whisper v6, as described in EIP-627:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary of main differences between Waku v0 spec and Whisper v6, as described in [EIP-627](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-627):
```

date:   2020-02-10 12:00:00 +0800
author: oskarth
published: false
permalink: /waku-current-state
categories: research
summary: A research log. Waku current state.
image: /assets/img/TODOFIXME.png
discuss: https://forum.vac.dev/t/TODOFIXME
---

TODO: Picture for bottleneck or Waku
TODO: Fix date

# Where we are at with Waku?

Waku is our fork of Whisper where we address the shortcomings of Whisper in an iterative manner. We've seen a in [previous post](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku) that Whisper doesn't scale, and why. Here's an update on where we are at with Waku since then.

## Current state

**Specs:**

We've cut the spec up into three components. These are:

- Waku (main spec), currently in [version 0.3.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/waku.html)
- Waku envelope data field, currently in [version 0.1.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/envelope-data-format.html)
- Waku mailserver, currently in [version 0.2.0](https://specs.vac.dev/waku/mailserver.html)

**Clients:**

There are currently two clients that implement Waku, these are [Nimbus](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus/tree/master/waku) in Nim and [status-go](https://github.com/status-im/status-go) in Go.

> At the time of writing the Nimbus client implements the spec fully, but lacks mail server/client, rate limiting and confirmations capability. The status-go client implements everything except bridging mode, which is currently a work in progress.

Author: @adambabik please confirm this is accurate, ideally with link to whats left
